


Lad Ss 
24 
aes 
ee 
C= 
ayy 
ee 
sea 
a OG as 
cag 
age 


7 

















ILS ON THE LABOR AND PARMER-LABOR PARTY 


‘Refarms and reformism in developing Capitalism. 


In its stace of develonment, cavitelism was able to make cenno- 
mic and volitical concessions to the proletariat, but it actually 
made them only where the vroletariat foucht for them, This militent 
struggle for reforms, and the reforms actually gained as the result. 
of the struggle, were progressive. The hourgesisie, rowever, more 
ane more suecececed in presenting these reforms not as gained thraugh 
the strucele of tho workers, but as either granted by the nourecoi- 
sie of its own will, or as gained through thege leaders of the pre- 
letariat, who hac become the agénts of the bourgeoisie in the parks 


of the workers, i.e. the reformist leaders, keformism, the practice 
and theory of feining reforms as an end in itself, not as prepara~ 
tion for the overtarort of the canitalist syskem as a_ whole, grew gm 
tae Labor movement on Gio social basis of the wpper layers o1 thé 
working-class, especially in those countries where the bourgeoisie 
fattened on -suder-vrofits from colonial @uplotivetion allowing 1t to 
make conciderable corcessions to tho"loosr-aristocracy". Thus sett- 
ine one section of the oroletariat against the ether: international- 
Ly, the proleterict ef one country agcinst all others (especially 
the colonicis); netionally, the workers of one nationality, racc, 
religioun creed egeinst sll othors: onc, above all, skilled against — 
unskilled workers, reforaism fulfilled its task of splitting the | 
vorkine-class. The bribing of the upper Leyers of the working-class 
wecame the mesne of Llescinge the class as a whole from the path of 7: 
class struggle to thet of class collaboration. 3 








Roforme and reformism in decay Capitelisn. 


In its oresent period of decay, capitalism cannot grant these 
reforms. The economic baris of reformism has been wiped out. The 
United States is no excevtion. This gituation leaves the door open 
for hollow political reforms without rcal economic content. In the 
pest, Buropean workers got not only economic reforms, but also their 
political courteroart. a ss oe 
This éoes not m@en that cconomic gains cannot be made here and. 
there, even tho the economic besis of reformism has been wiped out. 
Concessions made today, nowever, are made to the class marching to- 
word power, threatening the rule of capitalism. A small sacrifice 
today in order to behesd the movement tomorrow, that is the formula. 

, Reformism can live anc grow even without csininge reforms. in 
the decay stage, when the working clase Is ready to seize power, 
reformism as a political movement is used by the capitalist class to 
Stem the tide, to direct these strurgles into safe channels. Once 
woven into the social stinicturs, reformism Gots not Cie the moment 
its economic basis ic cestreyed. The politiecsl movement of reform- — 
ism and its ideology cen still rely on the capitalist system of which 
it is a pert, But roarormism todey is reformism of-cthe decay stage. 

In those countries that heve gone through the experience of 
this reformism of the decay stage(to be referred to hereafter merely 


as teformiem), withovt a clase party of the proletariat to direct the 


ropulting cisillusionment into revolutionary channels, the pethy- | 
bourgeoisie develepes a new type of movement, - Fascism. — 2 


canes 








 Reformism and Fascism. 


Both reformism and fascism are created by the petty bourgeelsie 
as instruments of struggle against the big bourgeoisie, within the 
franevork of capitalist society, that is, for its reform. By means 
of veformism, the petty bourgeoisie tries to lead the proletariat 
behind it, to utilize it against the big capitalists; by means of 
fascism, it tries te destroy it as an organized force, soe that it 
(the petty bourgeoisie) and not the proletariat will get the benefit 
of the reforms which the fascist petiy bourgeoisie hopes to force — 
the big capitalists to grant. Both reformism and fascism are move-— 
ments having as a goal the reform of capitalism. They necessarily 
become instruments ef the bourgeoisie used primarily against the 
proletariat, and secondarily against the petty bourgeoisie itself, 
Sections of the big capitalists participate from the very outset in 
the building of both reformist and fascist movements by the petyy 
bourgeoisie. | | See SS 

_ Sefermism and fascism are two stages in the attempt of the pety — 
bourgeoisie to play an independent role in the struggle between the 
bourgeoisie and the pr@letariat. Where the proletariat fails to 
direct mass disillusionment with reformism into revolutionary chan- 
nels, faseism is the answer of the petty bourgeoisie. In other 
words, where reformism on the one hand or the revolutionary prole~ — 
tariat on the other, have not yet been put to the test, there is no 
brosd base for fascism to grow upon. In the United States, there- 
fore, the approaching enemy is reformism, not fascism. Reformism _ 
dangerous precisely because history shows it prepares the road to 

ascism. | 





Base of reformism in the decay stage. 


Capitalism as a world system is in its decay stage. It can no 
longer grant economic concessions that could serve as a basis for 
reformism. But this fact is not true to the same extent in all | 
capitelist countries. The strongest imperialist countries are able 
to bribe important sections of the working class even under deway — 
capitalism by means of economic concessions. This is especially 
true of the United States, the strongest capitalist country in the. 


_ world. In spite of the marked leveling out process, the division 


between the priveleged workers on the one hand and the mass of un-— 
skilled workers and unemployed on the other will continue until the 


world hegemony of U.S. will be broken. There is therefore, more of 


an economic basis.for reformism in the 0.5. than in other strong 
links of the capitalist chain, -Englend, for example. The relative 
economic condition of the Americon workers as a whole today compared 


with their standards of yesterday is lower and continues on a down-_ 


ward curve. As for the weaker links (Germany,Japan,Italy) this 
basis for reformism has been almost completely wiped out. 


Basis of reformism in the United States- needs of the bourgeois: — 


Todey the bourgeoisie need more effective weapons to hold down 
the proletariat than those it employed in the developing stage. As 
the economic basis of reformism is wiped out in Furopean countries, 
the bourgeoisie is forcee more and more to replace (class-collabo- 


ration by corruption) by fascism (class-collaboration by terror). 


The situation is very different in the U.S. Here, reformism has ~ 
never developed beyond a limited embryonic extent. The bourgeoisie | 


has granted economic concessions openly thru their labor licuten- 








ants and not thru "socialistic¥ reformist leaders, who pose before 
the masses as fighters against the bourgeoisie. onsidering they - 
still grant certain economic reforms, the American bourgeoisie can 
utilize the variant of broadening the basis of class collaboration 
by corruption. > : | | ee eee 

cc This road is especially necessary for_the bourgeoisie as the - 
proletariat becomes 'Ruropeanizea”™ \socially. ana economically re- 
stricted and politically active and class-conscious), and an ever~ 
growing section of the workers enters tne ranks. of the permanently 

unemployed. But only @ section of tne pourgeoisie is capable of 

understanding this necessity and of taking tho necessary measures 
of overhauling U.S. cavitelism. The "New Dealers", struggling for 


= 


their own sectional intevests as weil as for their ciass as a whole, 


must win the support of tne working masses, both proletarian and 


petty bourgeois against other sections of the bourgeoisie. This - 
twofold task (finding effective weapons against the proletariat and 
at the same time against the other seftions of the bourgeoisie) 
forces the "New Deal" to broaden its base for class collaboration 
with the proletariat, which carries with it the collaboration of 
the petty bourgeoisie. = : | | | 
It is therefore clear why sections of the New Deal bourgeoisie 
support the movement for industrial class Ccollaborationist unions 
on the one hand, and the movement for a FParmer-Labor Party.on the 
other. This 1s not to say that the older methods of class collab~ 
oration are @ropped. However, the craft type of class collabora- 
tionist union, though utilized by the Old Deal bourgeoisie, is. 
forced to support the ‘New Dealers, in order not to be swept aside. 
by the tide of industrial class collaboration unionism which that 
section of the bourgeoisie support. On the political field,however, 
the new type of politicians the class relations is bringing to the 


surface, the Roosevelt and LaGuardia.type of New Dealer are for the — 
time still strong enough to utilize, and at the same time force into 
capitulation, the LaFollettes and Olsons, and with them, the whole 
string of Third Party advocates: the Thomases, Browders, etc. 
Sections of the New Dealers, nevertheless,.are preparing the ground 
for and even help build, a more radical and "independent" opposition, 
with a more definitely anti--capitalist, "social.st" type of dema- 
gogy: A Farmer-Labor Party. it is then that the smaller regional . 
capitalist interests, represented by the LaFollette, Olson, Huey 
Long type, themselves threatened by ever-growing coneentration of - 
capital, will play the decisive role in harnessing the opposition 

of the worker and farmers. : | 


Basis of reformism in the U.S. - The petty bourgeoisie 


As a result of the agrarian crisis, class reletions in the U.S. 
ean be characterized by a large radicalizing rural population of. 
petty proprietors, at a time when the proletariat has not yet cre- 


ated its own class party. In such a situation, the petty bourgeoisie | 


always attempts to create a broad “party of the people”. Their 
purpose is to harness the superior organized fighting strength Of -. 
the proletariat to their struggle against the big capitalists. The 
objective situation today favors the creation of such a party. 
Subjectively also the rural and urban small owners-are looking for. 
a “way out" through a "Peoples Party". The majority of Negro petty 
bourgeoisie, oriented as a result of their special situation to- — 
follow a proletarian party if it existed, now, on the contrary, | 
constitute one of the most important contingents for the formation 
of a petty bourgeois party. Sections of the urban middle class, — 








Se » NN a SC ee eee oe 
Ss Sea eee >| 
be: ee. ee 
SEN ree 





q ee rae SS Se eee 
a = ~ ~~ tas 
a rn ae ~—— oa 
oe Bering ) 


a 


such ag the small shop keepers pressed by the chain stores, pro- 
fessionals driven by overcrowding of their field, small manufactur- 

ers, traders, middle class students, etc., all give impetus to the — 
reformist movements. ee ee : | ee 

"The lower middle-class, the small manufacturer, the shop 

keeper, the artisan, the farmer, all these fight against the bour- — 
geoisie, to save from extinction their existence as freftions Of Ene = 
middle class. they are therefore not revolutionary. Nay more, they 


are reactionary, for they try to roll back tne wheeL of nistory. 
 ----- Communist Manifesto. Ess “Mite | vi oe 





Basis of Reformism in the United States - in the proletaria’ 


‘The working class of the 0.8. has not yet created its class 
party to guide and warn it against the trap of reformism. It has 
not even gone thru the school of independent pola ee in. 
any form whatsoever. Neither in the period of developing capital- 
ism nor since the decay stage has it experienced a period of soctial- 
ist-tinged reformism. While the European preletariat went through 
the mill of reformism, the American workers were largely isolated. 
Today the American proletariat is undergoing a process of "Huropean- 
ization". It is being drawn into the world labor movement at a 
time when the world proletariat is defeated, demoralized, leaderless. 
The Lessons the American workers are learning on this phase of the 
struggle therefore are negative: unity at all costs, between alt 
workers, advanced and backward; unity of workers witt the petty 
pourgeoisie, end "democratic" sections of the big capitalists. The 

great lessons of the past, including the October Revolution, were 
largely lost on the workers of this. country... their first’ "lesson" 
of the “Europeenization" process is - the People's Front. The 
‘Soviet burocracy, anxious to find.a mass base in this country to be 
used as pressure for an alliance between the U.S. and the USSR, has 
thrown its oe ees behind the creation of a broad class-collaboration 


ist "reformist" movement. ‘The danger that the awakening Amer.can 
‘proletariat will first trail behind the petty bourgeoisie, cannot 
be overemphasised. ee | ae 


Perspective of Reformism in the United States. 


| A reformist party and movement in this country is not an econo- 

mic or historical necessity. the more rapid tempo of American de- 
velopment did not bottle up the developing working class. Cn this 
basis the reformist movement was prevented from sinking Pools An. = 
American soil. ‘The most likely variant for the U.S. in the opresent = 
decay stage is a period of reformism, short in curation, a carica- 
ture of the European movement, yet just as deadty to the worxing 

- CLass..— s ae Sa ae 22 

= Whether the bourgeosisié will be able to drive the awakening — 
proletariat inte the channels of reformism depends on the internal 
developments of American capitelism in relation to world cepitarism 
and its effects on the world class strugeie and on the econcenmy and 
class relations in this country. Ail of this in town Wet. cAanasec 


seek Fie eaer eee artee ee anes eas ates : ; | 2 
Sica tion the role the proletarian vanguard will be able to piay. A 


2 favorable situation in this country for the class and its rerty can 
rapidly transform the period of refomnism gnto a perioc of revyolu-. 
tionery activity provided the revolut. onary Ward st organi secion 13s 
equal to the task. “The Workers! and Peasants! Patsy can only be a 
basis, a cover, a springberd for the hourgéoisie.” (frotsky in 1328) 


A Farmer-Labor Party is a reformist bourgeois perty. It cannot 
be an instrument of the proletariat, but is an instrument of the. 
pourgeoisie against the proletariat, and secondly an instrument of 
the petty bourgeoisie, utilizing the workers for their purposes 
against the big bourgeoisie. The aim of a Farmer-Labor Party can 
only be thes(i.e. support) of capitalism. | | 


PELORMs fe Se 5 | Si pee ass . 
Farmer-Labor Party as a form of the Peoples Front. 


The propaganda and actual organization of Farmer-Labor Parties 
has become the main instrument of the Socialist Militant and Stalin- 
ist agents of the bourgeoisie in the ranks of the workers, with - 
which to gag the workers and hand them over to the "liberal" New 
Deal section of the bourgeoisie. The Farmer-Labor Party represents 
in the U.S. the counterpart of the "Pecpleis Front" in other coun- 
tries; with this difference: In Europe, due to a’ higher ssate Or 
the class struggle, it is not a question of cumpirg smell propaganda 
groups like the SP and the CP in the U.S.:into a "People's Party" 

Gane Farmer-Labor Party).. There it is a guesticen of maintaining 
the existing reformist mass parties (pessibly fused into an "Organic 
Unity" party) within a "front" of the petty. bourgeoisie and the lib- 
eral cection of the big bourgeoisie. The Farmer-Labor Party.means 
a still more abject subordination of the proletariat than achieved © 
by the People's Front. The Farmer-Labor Party is an attempt to 
stifle a backward, awakening, but not yet tested or defeated prole- 
tariat, while the People's Front in Europe has the task of control- 
ing an advanced but atready defeated working class. : 

Among the historieal examples and experiences of the world pro- 
letariat can be listed the Populist movement of the.U.S. in the 19th 
Century, The Non-Partisan League of the Northwest, the Kuomintang of 
China. “These were all forrunners of which. the Farmer-Labor Party of 
Minnesota is the latest example. It is false to speak of the gains 
gotten from the Farmer-Labor Party. Rather how much greater would 
the class gains have been if these energies had not been misdirect- 
ed into petty bourgeois.channels. There can be no doubt that Olson 
in the strike of Local 574 in Minneapolis, and his role in general, 
has stunted revolutionary development. | 


One class reformist parties. 


In Europe, the awakening of the proletariat to independent po- 
litical action (separate from the petty bourgeoisie) took place in 
the earlier, developing. period of capitalism. The growth of reform- 
ism largely nullified this achievement. The mass parties of the pro- 
letariat {social-democratic or Labor) were not yet class parties of 
the proletariat. They did not represent the full interests of the 
class as a whole. The separation of the revolutionists from the re- 
formists ‘achieved only in Russia in the’ developing period of capi- 
talism) marked the beginning of truly independent political action o: 
the proletariat, i.e. complete separation from the petty bourgeoisie. 

Reformist parties serve the interests of the bourgeoisie. When 


the bourgeoisie can make concessions, this fact is hidden; but when 
they can no longer make them, it becomes obvious: in all its nakedness 
The role of the Social Democracy in 1914 and since the war has final-— 
ly established this fact beyond dispute. Experience has confirmed 
the Marxist analysis that any movement aiming at the reform of cap- 
italism, must serve the capitalists. In the earlier phases, the 
Sociel-Democratic and Labor parties, to the extent that they carried 
on class struggle activity and spread socialist ideology, played a 
progressive role. They were a definite step on the road towards in- 
aependcence. | eee 


rith the establishment of definite proletarian class perties y 


through complete separstion from the petty pourgeoisie, the pro- 
gressive role of reformist pertics came to an end. If this is true 
under developing cepitalism, it is a aunared times more so uncer 
decaying capitalism. After the erperionces of the war, of the Oct- 
ober Revolution, of the reformist perties in the post-war period -- 
to reneat now the stage already outcatedc at the beginning of this 
century, would be criminal stupidity. thet wae progressive when the 
proletariat was still groping. for the correct political forms to 6x- 
prees and orgenize its aspirations, has bhecomesreactionery as soon 
as these forms were found and tested in-strugele. — : = 


Al 
i 


Affiliation to a Labor Party would mean, subjectively to most 
workers in the J.S. a step forward to indepencent political action. 
But to the elass interests of these workers it vould be a step back~ 
yard. By building up a philosopny of eracualism, legelity, parlia- 
mentorism, the Labor Party prevents them trom teking the next step | 
toverds indenendent political action. Obiectively, therefore, the 
oreation of a Labor party vould not be @ rranvaration for the form- 
ation of e revolutionary class party, but the most effective way of 
blocking it. It would be a trep to hold beck the workers from the 
rosé to revolution. It would not be, 4s seme advocetes of the Labor 
Perty argue, a school for the creztion of es class party. The role. 
of the British Labor Party as a brake on the development of the Eng- 
lish vroletariat should be sufficient werning aeainst building this 
fornidable obstecle to the road to power. to build.e.Lapor Party _,, 
is not to "help a baby walk: tocay in ordcr thst 1t may Tun tomorrow « 
To 2 less a party is an instrument. of state power. There is only 
ONE road to power, and only ONE: kind of party that can lead to this 
goals .~ the revolutionary Marxten party... it is beyona tne power of 
the class to use the Stelinist and Sccialist parties as instruments 
of revolution, or to reform these perties, anc it is equally as ae 
futile to endeavor to transform the Labor Party into such an instru- 
MenL-. = . tera tead 2 = ? 
tRovolutionary" Labor or Farmer Labor Party. 


There can be no such thing es a REVOLUTIONARY Labor Party. All 
such parties are reformist. The concept of a revolutionary Labor 


orty denies the role of the Marxian Party. itis a substitute that 
eennot fulfill the role assigned to it. Only © revolutionary class 
party cen lead the struggle agains WAR AND- FEECISM. A Labcr Party, 
since it is reformist, can only nave the way to war and fescism,. 
4Sust as the reformist Social-Democraty« aid in1914, an 1926 in = 


Ce 


Ttely and in 1953 in Germany. i ies . = 
= - - Role of Labor and Farmer Labor Party: ~~ 


Farmér-Labor Party openly cl¢ims to defend the interests of 


asses. In reality, this leads to the subordination of the 
workers interests to those of the petty bourgecisie and thereby to 


these of the big bourgeoisie. . A Lebor Party, cn the otner hand, 
ciaims to represent the intecrests of one class. It is reformist, 
nevertheless, and expresses ‘only the fears, protests, and aspirations 
of workers closest to.the petty-bourgeoisie, and subordinates the 
interests of the proletariat to those of the bourgeoisie.in the 
finel analysis, therefore, both the Labor Party and the Parmer-Labor 
Paruy sare nationalist in outlook. Their foreign policy would be as 


3 


nationalist as thet of the British Labor Party, supporting "its" 
imperialism in its oppression of the colonial peoples end its 

war preparations. : 7 | 7 

Tney accomplish their purpose by differcnt methods based on snocific 
national conditions. In England, for example, with a numerically 
strong proletariat and a_weak farm population, a Farmer-Labor party 
enald never take root. In the United States, on the contrery, where 
the leading industriel states have at the same time the leadcing | 
sericultural arcas, it is the tvo-class party which finds favorable 
soil. This is, of course, not true in all areas. In the industrial 
cities,.class relationships are more favorable for the grovth of a 
Labor Party. The character of the National party, hovever, would 

he based on the country as a whole, yhere the two class nolicies 
would be decisive for the local and state parties. Local and state 
"Labor Parties" within the nationel Fermer-Labor Party vould play 
sgn Mens drawing the more advanced sections of the yvorkers into 
the Latter. | | 


‘Due to the fect thet there sre 48 different sets of election 
laws, no matter what. the name of the party will be nationally, in 
each state it will be compelled to employ different names in order 
to get on the ballot. ‘e will find Labor, Fermer-Labor, Socialist, 
Communist, Progressive, Commonwealth, etc., as names. employed in 
the various states. Furthermore, it makes no difference if the. 
party is based on individual or collective membership. The party, 
at bottom, will be a reformist organization. |. z : 


‘The movement for a Labor and Farmcr-Labor Party. 


The leedership in the FLP movement today beléngs to Governor 

. Olson, Senator Nye enc other representatives of smaller regional _ 
capitalism. The farmers, the city middle class, the intellectuals, 
the trade union leaders, the "Socialist" and "Communist" leaders, 
all trail behind. then, in the orcer nomec, éach trying to "bring 
pressure" on the force ebove them, but cach capitulating when they 
capitulate. Olson capitulates to Roosevelt; so Thomas cepitulates 
to Olson, an¢ Brovder to Thomas, that is to say, they all capitulate 
- +9 Boosevelt in. succession like a house of cards. It is obvious 
that conditions ere not yet ripe for the launching of a national 
Fermer-Labor Perty, .since the Nev. Deel bourgeoisie is so indisputa- 
bly mester of the situation. The FLP as a mass movement. depends on 
the develonment of the economic situation in the U.S, and through- 
out the vorld. There can be no doubt, hovever, that larger. masses 
of vorkers and petty bourgeoisie are turning towards this.-"solution" 
of their problems. The SP Militants ond the Stelinists conceive of 
their parties precticelly as propegande groups for the FLP, in which 
they hope to be more or less Nincéependent" parts. Of the smaller 
groups, the Trotskyite Socialist Party group, opposed in words to 
the FLP, in action works for it. At the Fashington Unemployed Con- 
ference, they actually voted for it. The Lovestonite CPO, on the 
other hand, counterposes a Labor Perty to a Farmer-Labor arty, which 
as shorn above, is a snare for the two class party. 


The propagenda for a Labor Perty is far more dangerous to the 
future development of the proletariat then for a Farmer-Labor Party, 
since it helps confuse.advanced workers who already see the treach- 

ery of a two-class party. Workers vho learn to reject a reformist 
ae tole vill not fall prey to the propaganda for a two-class 
per Ve ; ‘ SS ae 

| | Our Road 


The Revolutionary Workers Leegus counterposes to the opportun- 
ist non-revolutionary Labor Perty and Farmer-Labor Perty, the line 
of INDEPENDENT ACTION OF THE iORKING CLASS THROUGH THE POLITICAL 
ee INDEPENDENCE OF THE REVOLUTIONARY MARXIAN ORGANT- 
£45 ® i23 


The proletariat cen achieve its ovmm emancipation only by eman- 
cipating all the oppressed. It can overthrow capitalism only in | 
sllience vith all the oppressed... But alliance ith other oppressed | 
eloasses presupposes sepsrate organization of the proleteriat. 


Fractions in Labor end Fermer-Labdor Parties. — 


where members of the RWL as members of unions and other workers! 


organizations affiliated to a Labor or Farmer-Labor Party automatic- 
ally become members of these partics they must openly organize as a 


RL fraction, sorking under instructions 


from the Central Committee. 


if the historical conditions leading to! Lenin's proposel for _ 
the C.P.G.B.*sentry inte the British Lebor-Party could be repeated, 
then, but only then the same tactic could be considered. ~~ 


Revel ubicnary “Norkers League 
28 East 14 Street | 
“New York City 7 




